#summary Cross Validation can be used as a better method of testing classifier accuracy

= Introduction =

In the [ClassificationExample previous example], we tested out classifier on the same data we trained with. This is bad practice, because we have given our classifier a possible unfair advantage - its already seen these examples! 

Instead, we can use a method called [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cross-validation_(statistics) cross validation] to get a better idea of how well our classifier would generalize 


= Code =

{{{
import java.io.File;
import jsat.ARFFLoader;
import jsat.DataSet;
import jsat.classifiers.ClassificationDataSet;
import jsat.classifiers.ClassificationModelEvaluation;
import jsat.classifiers.Classifier;
import jsat.classifiers.bayesian.NaiveBayes;

/**
 * Testing data on the same data used to train is considered bad, and can overstate the true accuracy of a classifier. 
 * Cross Validation is a method to evaluate a model by cycling through the whole data set. While this takes more time,
 * it uses all the data for both training and testing, without ever testing a data point that was trained on. 
 * 
 * @author Edward Raff
 */
public class ClassificationCrossValidationExample
{

    /**
     * @param args the command line arguments
     */
    public static void main(String[] args)
    {
        String nominalPath = "uci" + File.separator + "nominal" + File.separator;
        File file = new File(nominalPath + "iris.arff");
        DataSet dataSet = ARFFLoader.loadArffFile(file);
        
        //We specify '0' as the class we would like to make the target class. 
        ClassificationDataSet cDataSet = new ClassificationDataSet(dataSet, 0);

        //We do not train the classifier, we let the modelEvaluation do that for us!
        Classifier classifier = new NaiveBayes();
                
        ClassificationModelEvaluation modelEvaluation = new ClassificationModelEvaluation(classifier, cDataSet);
        
        //The number of folds is how many times the data set will be split and trained and tested. 10 is a common value
        modelEvaluation.evaluateCrossValidation(10);
        
        System.out.println("Cross Validation error rate is " + 100.0*modelEvaluation.getErrorRate() + "%");
        
        //We can also obtain how long it took to train, and how long classification took
        System.out.println("Trainig time: " + modelEvaluation.getTotalTrainingTime()/1000.0 + " seconds");
        System.out.println("Classification time: " + modelEvaluation.getTotalClassificationTime()/1000.0 + " seconds\n");
        
        //The model can print a 'Confusion Matrix' this tells us about the errors our classifier made. 
        //Each row represents all the data points that belong to a given class. 
        //Each column represents the predicted class
        //That means values in the diagonal indicate the number of correctly classifier points in each class. 
        //Off diagonal values indicate mistakes
        modelEvaluation.prettyPrintConfusionMatrix();
        
    }
}

}}}

= Review =

If you are an engineer with a classification problem and a handful of data points, this code is sufficient to get started. One can just try out different classifiers and see what works and what does not. If the basic classifiers don't provide acceptable accuracy, more complicated work will have to be done. 